# Initialization

IKVM contains the bulk of the open source OpenJDK project, especially it's base class library. This set of classes requires some upfront initialization. In a normal Java distribution this is initiated by the VM itself. However, since IKVM can be loaded as a .NET assembly, making the Java base class library immediately available to users, IKVM needs to initialize the base class library before any user access to the classes occurs.

In addition to this IKVM distributes multiple versions of the OpenJDK base class library compiled for the three major operating systems: Windows, Linux and MacOS. Before access to the base class library happens the correct .NET assembly has to be loaded.

## .NET

Loading of the base class library assembly on .NET is relatively simple. The IKVM NuGet package distributes multiple assemblies within the `runtimes/{rid}/lib/{tfm}` directory. The .NET SDK is capable of configuring your .NET application which references IKVM to either load the correct assembly at runtime in the case of Framework-dependent builds or to only include the required assembly in the case of Framework-independent builds). This is done by writing the correct entries into your `.deps.json` file.

In addition to that, we distribute a reference assembly in the NuGet package which the compiler uses to build your code irrespective of the final assembly or assemblies that are distributed.

Initialization of the base class library happens when the IKVM.Runtime assembly is loaded. Since the base class library depends upon IKVM.Runtime, IKVM.Runtime has a chance to initiate initialization before user code calls or accesses the classes in the base class library.

## .NET Framework

The situation for .NET Framework is different. Framework supports no mechanism similar to `.deps.json` nor does it include any other method by which to alter how the runtime locates assemblies BEFORE an attempt by user code is made to load that assembly on the basis of the running operating system. This isn't usually a big deal as Framework-independent builds aren't something that users often do: Windows is usually assumed to be the target OS. However, Mono does exist.

To solve this issue the IKVM NuGet package injects generated code into the user's projects which include the package either directly or transitively. This code ensures that the `IKVM.Runtime` assembly is loaded before any user code has a chance to run. And this assembly hooks up to `AppDomain.AssemblyResolve` to add custom logic for load the correct `IKVM.Java` assembly and initializing the base class library. This is done by generating a ModuleInitializer method that is added to your assembly.

If for some reason you are in a situation where you cannot rely on the MSBuild integration to inject the appropriate module initializer, ensure that before you access any Java classes you ensure the `IKVM.Runtime` is loaded. A simple way to do this is to grab a reference to a type within `IKVM.Runtime` at the start of any of your code: `GC.KeepAlive(typeof(IKVM.Runtime.JVM))`.