# Initialization

IKVM contains the bulk of the open source OpenJDK project, especially it's base class library. This set of classes requires some upfront initialization. In a normal Java distribution this is initiated by the VM itself. However, since IKVM can be loaded as a .NET assembly, making the Java base class library immediately available to users, IKVM needs to initialize the base class library before any user access to the classes occurs.

In addition to this IKVM distributes multiple versions of the OpenJDK base class library compiled for the three major operating systems: Windows, Linux and MacOS. Before access to the base class library happens the correct .NET assembly has to be loaded.

## .NET

Loading of the base class library assembly on .NET is relatively simple. The IKVM NuGet package distributes multiple assemblies within the `runtimes/{rid}/lib/{tfm}` directory. The .NET SDK is capable of configuring your .NET application which references IKVM to either load the correct assembly at runtime in the case of Framework-dependent builds or to only include the required assembly in the case of Framework-independent builds). This is done by writing the correct entries into your `.deps.json` file.

In addition to that we distribute a reference assembly in the NuGet package which the compiler uses to build your code irrespective of the final assembly or assemblies that are distributed.

Initialization of the base class library happens when the `IKVM.Runtime` assembly is loaded. Since the base class library depends upon `IKVM.Runtime`, `IKVM.Runtime` has a chance to initiate initialization before user code calls or accesses the classes in the base class library.

## .NET Framework

The situation for .NET Framework is different. Framework supports no mechanism similar to `.deps.json` nor does it include any other method by which to alter how the runtime locates assemblies BEFORE an attempt by user code is made to load that assembly on the basis of the running operating system. This isn't usually a big deal as Framework-independent builds aren't something that users often do: Windows is usually assumed to be the target OS. However, Mono does exist.

IKVM cannot solve this issue alone without intervention from Mono. There is no way to cleanly ensure one variant of an assembly is loaded when that assembly's loading can be driven by other unknown assemblies that depend upon it. So, until then, we leave the issue unresolved.

When building or publishing for .NET Framework without a RID, the Windows version of `IKVM.Java.dll` is made as output. The Linux and OS X variants are included within `runtimes/{rid}/lib/{tfm}` but Mono has no way to know this. However, you can still do a RID-specific build for .NET Framework. When doing so, the proper variant is included instead.
